Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee Dan Green.
The location is the Swicker office
and today's date is the 9th of October 2015.
Before we start Dan, would you very kindly,
for the record, spell your name in four?
No worries.
Okay, D-A-N, Dan, and then Green, G-R-E-E-N.
Excellent.
Can you remember your first point of contact
with the Cardiff Carnival, which I would imagine
at that point was known as the Cardiff Mask Carnival?
Yeah, it was.
Okay, so for me it would be the early 90s.
I can't specify exactly when,
but it would be the early 90s.
I was around about 13 or 14
and my father was involved with it.
I think he led it.
My father, Frank Rosalind Green,
he was, past tense,
he was an actor performer.
I would still say he's a performer now.
So he's definitely on that side of the camera search
and definitely an outward sort of dancer as well, performer.
He led it as his clown name, Franco Pissetti,
white-faced clown.
I remember he had a, I think I'm right in saying,
he had a red star, so he was leading it
like sort of an old Orleans sort of funeral,
it felt like.
And so he was at the very, very front as a young man
or young boy watching that.
That stuck in my mind.
And yeah, and I think I followed him.
As the clown, I would actually step away from him,
but follow him and watch him interact.
And he was fantastic doing that.
But also the century overload of all the colors,
all the nations, all the sort of flamboyancy
and celebration of these different people,
that stuck in my memory.
And like I said, I was quite a young guy
and I remember, yeah, he was going down Butte Street
and then going into the Hays, I think.
I think I went through the Hays in the center of Cardiff.
So yeah, that was my very first recollection of it.
And then it wasn't two years later.
I remember going down quite often just to watch it.
And then I developed, I got into photography
when I was about 15, 16.
So it's sort of the end of school time
and I did a few courses.
It was just a prime target really.
This happens every year in Cardiff.
It was a fantastic opportunity to take photographs
in black and white, but more so in color.
So I got into it around about the millennium,
around about 2004, 2005.
I then started taking photographs of the carnival.
I remember the blue devils,
loads of kids dressed up as blue devils.
And being allowed by the Swicker crew
to go beyond the barrier, which is quite nice.
I didn't want to wear a yellow fluorescent jacket,
but they allowed me to go in there and interact as well.
So that was really key to have that license
to take these intimate photographs
as they were performing, et cetera, or doing the procession,
but also going there early enough to get the people
setting up and all those months and weeks of preparation
to get to that point.
Going there early as a photographer was fantastic
to get that anticipation, that excitement, that buzz,
but also catch them preparing themselves
for the long day ahead.
And yeah, that was extra special.
And then from there, I would say, wow.
I would say from about 2007 onwards,
every year I photographed it,
I didn't photograph it one year,
can't remember exactly which one, maybe 2012,
because I twisted my ankle and I was devastated.
So, and now I'm a photographer and project organizer,
arts project organizer.
I've been working with Swicker for, god, for quite a while.
Yeah, for a long time.
And some of the best shots that we have,
and of course these will be seen on our online archive
when it's launched, the People's Collection Wales.
You were very interested in portraiture, weren't you,
at one point, and the human face.
And it was quite nice because you were catching
the carnival faces, which are often covered in sequins,
or just transformed.
But also then I noticed that you started then
capturing those same faces after the parade,
when they'd been through the blood, sweat, and tears.
And that flamboyant,
mirror had cracked to some degree
and the humanity was shining through even more so.
Yeah, and not only that, when it was raining,
so their makeup was really sinister,
but they were smiling,
so that sometimes made it look even more sinister.
But yeah, that was great.
And I had that style of getting in close.
So my criticism as a photographer
was to step back and look around you.
So I started to do that a bit more,
but I would really want to get in close.
So it was more about filling the frame
and seeing the exuberance through the eyes, really.
So I was into that a lot, and eventually I did back off.
But like I said, it was going there early enough
to get the preparation and to have that license
to take these intimate shots.
But also the person's confidence in me
to take that photograph and recognize who I was.
So it wasn't as if you would go in, do the job, go out.
So I don't think photography is too much like that, really.
And you've got two hours of window opportunity,
you come in, out you go.
Sometimes that makes perfect sense, fine.
But for the carnival, it would be wake up early,
get loads of food inside you, take cereal bars with you,
and you know it's gonna be a seven, eight hour job.
And same for the people in it,
because they had to be full of energy,
they had to keep going.
And obviously you've got people around you
inspiring you to keep going
and the motivation to keep going.
But you'd have pigs and troughs who'd dip in energy.
But yeah, there was surges.
And as we talked about, I would sometimes sit down
and then just take it in five minutes,
then stand back up and go back into it.
Because you would run up and down,
well I would anyway, run up and down with the carnival
and trying to get certain shots that you wanna,
you didn't plan out, but there's certain iconic shots
you wanted to get with a certain background
that was noticed firebly is in Cardiff and what have you.
But also just to be in the right place at the right time.
And also you had to, within that, relax
because there's a lot going on
and you can't capture everything.
And as I developed it as a photographer,
and more photographers were involved in Swicker,
it was nice seeing what they were doing,
what I was doing and then trying to,
so for the archives, trying to do something different.
So there was a collection at the end
of the carnival of the whole picture.
So it was nice to not work with,
but to see what other photographers were doing
to then capture the full story, like I said.
So yeah, it's a photographer's dream.
Absolutely, absolutely.
An absolute photographer's dream.
And big smiley faces and amazing,
amazing elaborate costumes.
And the fact that every nation was there.
It was a, Cardiff and Britain is a melting pot
and it showed off that and showcased that
and it was a beautiful thing.
Of course, for our Cardiff Carnival
25th anniversary exhibition of the Cardiff story,
you brought a new element of your,
because it seems to me that,
well, I imagine all photographers are creative,
but you seem to be at the forefront of many things
in terms of the use of the image.
Would you care to tell us a bit about
what you did for the exhibition
and indeed what you've been doing recently in Uganda,
which I just, yeah, there we go.
You can explain them.
Absolutely, so it was nice to go back to the Cardiff story
in 2011, did an exhibition there called Big Little City,
which was a celebration of Cardiff's creative talents
and Swicker was involved in that
and that was a milestone for the sort of creative work
I've done, I think.
But then again, it was nice to return there in 2014,
yeah, 2014, to work with Swicker.
And we had, I was assigned three,
I'll repeat that now.
Sorry.
Good old coffee.
And Steve's gone.
I'll carry on.
Carry on.
Yeah, so yeah, in 2000,
so it was nice to return to the Cardiff story in 2014
after that exhibition I did in 2011.
And I was asked to do a big mural
of the different work I've done
and photographs I've done for Swicker.
And I worked with Mark Heatley, who's a designer,
he's a good friend and designer,
I've worked with many, many times, myself.
And we came up with a really, really, really large
paste-up of this, it's almost Sergeant Pepper-esque
mishmash cutouts all jumbled together,
collage of the different kind of photographs
from round about 2005, 2006 onwards.
And I wanted to include lots of other photographers,
but it was just finding the high-resolution images
all in one place,
because it was printing really, really large,
so therefore the quality had to be.
In terms of scale, how big was that?
Well, it was, if I'm right in saying it was two,
I remember, that's weird,
it was 280 high, but then 15 meters wide.
So it wrapped around half of the wall space upstairs
in the Calle Astoria, in the old ivy building.
So yeah, 15 meters long, about three meters high.
That is big.
It was massive.
It was a huge statement, lovely.
It was, and it was a nice backdrop to what was a really,
I'm not just saying this, because I was involved in it,
but it was a really coherent, clear, welcoming,
friendly celebration of Swicker's 25-year anniversary.
Really sort of resummed it up perfectly as well.
And I think it was a nice addition
to the quite cleanly sort of situated and placed artifacts
and history of Swicker.
It's gotta be the liveliest imagery
and scale of artwork I've ever seen.
So I'm smiling all over my face just thinking about that.
Yeah.
And of course, you've recently returned from Uganda,
where I think you've been using some of the same processes
with the SAFE Foundation.
I don't know if you can say a little bit more
about your current practice.
Absolutely.
SAFE Foundation are a local NGO,
so they're based in Bari and Cardiff,
and they do projects all over the world,
mainly with small communities that need the help.
So a lot of health, a lot of education, et cetera, et cetera.
You can see more type in the SAFE Foundation.
You can find out more.
I've basically been a photographer since 2010.
Been lucky enough to go to different countries
and document the projects they do.
But just come back from Uganda,
it was the last, oh God, three weeks ago,
two and a half weeks ago,
where we were there to build clay ovens
in a small community in Tororo in Uganda.
Clay ovens which they can bake bread
and cook food within it.
So we constructed them.
What was really nice that we went there
and it was a completed job,
as opposed to going in making something happen,
but it never quite, it came to the end
and never quite finished the project or what have you.
This was completely done,
and the onus is on the builders who watched us
and were taught how to make it to make more.
And also the onus is on the community to actually use them.
So it's a handover and it's a job well done all around.
So it was a pat on the back for everyone really.
But it's, like I say,
I've been on different community projects
where you go over there and it wasn't quite complete
and then you leave it
and then you come back in the same as you left it.
So that was nice.
And on top of that,
I went round photographing as well,
different communities, different people.
That's my main thing, photographing people.
And then found a printer in the capital, Kampala,
would send the images over there, send them back,
print them up in large scale,
and then glue and paste them onto the walls
where they were taken originally.
So you gave photography back to the communities
as opposed to taking the images and taking it back with you.
I'm not gonna sell the image.
The images were then are gonna be put
on the Safe for Nation website
to create more of a, promote what they do
and to get more people involved
and to get more money for the community.
So there's no actual commercial gain
as a photographer doing that.
But it was a lovely way to put work back on the wall
and celebrate them there and there.
So that's been, yeah, that's what I'm into at the moment
is to go to different places, photograph,
but then leave the image behind for them
and make them the celebrity,
make them the ones that should be celebrated.
Yes.
I mean, I've seen a number of these images
on social media.
The one that sticks in my mind,
and they gladden the heart,
the one outstanding image for me
is the elderly lady, the grandmother,
who is then photographed next to her giant size image
and the look on her face, ripped big.
And I was thinking like, wow, that is just,
all human life is there.
A lot of people have commented on that.
And coincidentally, the people I was staying with,
that was her sister, I had no idea.
She's a 94 year old woman.
I was putting it up
and she arrived with a walking stick.
It was a perfect moment.
Wish I had it on film,
but I was too busy gluing it on the wall.
But yeah, that was special, is special.
This is all influenced by a French artist called JR.
I can't take this sole credit for this.
And it's this sort of wave of doing that sort of work,
but not having any sponsorship on there
and just having a photograph of the person.
But I'm also now working with different artists.
So therefore we can create things.
It's not just a photograph,
it could be a painted background mural, what have you.
So we're working on that.
And the next thing I'm doing in Cardiff on Lauda Road
is a celebration of the work I did in Uganda
and then photographing that, sending it back to Uganda.
And in the Tororo region in Uganda,
they want me to come back and do more work,
which was lovely.
And not just that, headmasters and nurses, doctors,
peers of the community are writing letters for me
of support to come back.
And I'm trying to work out a way of raising money here,
taking some artists over there
and doing the same sort of work, but on a larger scale.
So that's where I'm heading, hopefully.
But by initially going over there and doing it,
the response was fantastic.
They fully embraced it.
I wasn't quite sure how they were gonna take it,
but it's all gone the right way.
Well done, Dan. Thank you.
Talking of things that perhaps
haven't quite gone the right way recently.
Here we go.
Yeah, go on, I'm ready.
Okay, just over two weeks ago,
the sole funder of Swickr Carnival,
the Arts Council of Wales,
announced the results of its investment review
and decided that Swickr would not be receiving
any public investment to keep going
from April 2006 onwards at the latest.
Obviously, a massive disappointment
from all those involved and yet to be involved.
Excuse me.
Dan, what was your reaction when I told you
and explained the situation this morning?
Coincidentally, I was in Uganda when I saw it.
Oh, right, right.
And someone sent me the link on social media
when I finally got a bit of internet.
I couldn't believe it.
It's a travesty.
It really, really is.
I know I'm emotionally connected to this
and it is a sort of family, the Swickr group.
And so I'm gonna be highly biased,
but even away from that and stepping aside from that,
if I remember being going,
harking back to the beginning of this interview
when I first saw the carnival,
yes, I was emotionally involved as well
because my father was part of it,
but seeing the carnival, being part of it,
being a onlooker, not being sort of
on the other side of the barrier, watching the audience,
it is a travesty for the community.
It's part of what Cardiff is to me, to be honest,
right from young age, really, throughout the 80s as well.
And it's just, it is a crime, to be honest.
It really is.
I'm not here to have a go at the Arts Council,
not here to have a go at the governing bodies.
I just think it's so worthwhile to keep going.
And I can't imagine the first weekend of August
in not being here, and that sounds really selfish,
but I think the whole city would really miss it.
But not only that, beyond that,
I used to love what happened in Swansea.
I thought that was a great carnival, and that stopped.
And then at Festival Number Six in recent years,
that's been fantastic, and imagine that not happening.
So it's a real, it's a weird emotion, really,
because it's part of the parcel,
it's the makeup of the city.
It's like taking away the castle.
It's really weird.
That's part of the human landscape
of Cardiff is the carnival, for me.
Not just for me, I'm sure for lots and lots of people.
So to see it not here anymore, I can't imagine it.
And imagine not a whole carnival not existing.
Imagine St. Paul's Carnival not existing.
It's just, you can't really imagine it.
So it's, yeah, it's a really bizarre one.
And yeah, we will see what happens.
But it's bizarre.
I'm in the office right now, and I'm surrounded by,
you know, it's sort of like a graveyard to the carnival.
It shouldn't be.
It's got to be.
Funny enough, yesterday, because it was distressing me,
I took down all the photographs.
I couldn't bear to see any human face.
Yeah, there are no photographs.
I couldn't bear it.
Yesterday, I suddenly realized what was,
I look at a huge emotional blockage to me.
I couldn't bear to see any human faces in here anymore.
So that was me yesterday.
But that's it.
Sorry, but that's not the story.
You're right.
This is the human element.
It's, you know, it's evolved.
It's evolved with the times.
It's incorporated all the different communities
within Cardiff.
It's been completely open to anybody and everybody.
It's been accommodating.
It's all the flipping, sorry, it's ticking all the boxes.
This is the annoying thing.
This ticks all the boxes.
So why isn't it being backed?
I know this financial climate.
Well, I know where we all are, but it's,
I don't understand the benefit of not having it.
I understand the benefit of having it.
So where's the arguments?
Who makes these decisions?
And why is this the case?
It is a travesty.
It really is.
It ain't over till it's over.
I'm sure in some form in the future,
it has to come back in some form
because this is embedded in the culture.
It's like stripping, it's weird.
It's a weird, I'm lost for words.
There you go.
It's hard to put into words what I really think about it.
And it's,
it's,
it just can't imagine it not existing.
On a more positive,
Yes, sorry, wait.
Oh, anyway.
Can I take this opportunity to award you
the nominal and unbankable, but invisible and untractable.
I'd like to award you the,
you are a Cardiff Carnival hero.
Dan Green, thank you very, very much for all.
And it's been a joy having you as part of the Swicker family
and bless you for capturing all those wonderful moments
from past carnivals.
Dan Green, you're a star.
Thank you very much.
Top, top, top.